During the lock down I started to research my family history. I very quickly discovered that my great great granddad Henry James Humphrey Swendell (1830 to 1896) had been a soldier in the Rifle Brigade. Since the army have maintained records for hundreds of years lots of detail can be uncovered about an ancestor who was a soldier.

Searching online for the Rifle Brigade quickly lead me to the Royal Green Jacket's museum in Winchester and then onto the regiment's archives held by the Hampshire Record Office (HRO). From Henry's service record I knew that he had been posted to Canada from 1861 to about 1870. Just before being posted to Canada Henry was promoted to Sergeant in the 1st battalion. Having reviewed the HRO archive listing I found an entry for a photo of the members of the sergeant's mess taken in Canada in 1868. My family has no photos of Henry, indeed we were all unaware of his time in the Rifle Brigade, so the chance of finding a photo of him was very exciting.

I ordered a copy of the photo which promptly arrived.

As you can see it's quite faded and the photos on the left of the portrait are quite indistinct. Unfortunately there was no key to identify the men in the photo. At this point I felt both elated and disappointed. I probably had a picture of my great great granddad, but I didn't know who he was! I have photos of three of Henry's sons and two of his daughters so I started to see if I could spot any family resemblance. I quickly decided this wasn't going anywhere because the portraits weren't very clear and Victorian fashion meant there was a lot of facial hair.

However, examining the photos made me realise that in most of them you could make out the soldier's medals pinned to their chest. Based on Henry's service record I knew that he had been awarded the British Crimea War medal and the Turkish Crimea War medal. This narrowed down the number of possible candidates, but not so that I could identify Henry.

In trying to find out more about Henry I'd recently found out about regimental muster rolls held at the National Archives. Amongst other things muster rolls were used to track soldiers' pay which is split out by rank. Following a post lock down visit to the National Archives to look at the Rifle Brigade's muster rolls from 1868 I had a listing of all of the sergeants, including Henry, in the 1st battalion.

I worked my way through the list trying to decipher copper plate writing and searching for service records online. Once I had a service record I could confirm that an individual had been in the Rifle Brigade, had been in Canada in 1868 and the medals they had been awarded. Once I had this information I returned to the portraits.

At this point I was hoping for some sort of pattern to emerge on how the portraits were organised. For example, were they ordered alphabetically or by seniority? Unfortunately I still haven't worked this out. I've searched online to see if there was any convention for ordering portraits and I've found nothing conclusive. So Henry remains tantalisingly close, but yet so far away!

I've promised myself that one day I'll make it to Winchester to visit the Royal Green Jacket's museum and the HRO archive to review the rest of the archive material on the Rifle Brigade. I'm still hopeful of identifying Henry.
